Get metadata from SRAdb example notebook (#10)
AlexsLemonade/2020-may-training: retrieve-SRAdb-metadata.Rmd

The tidyverse has the [`dbplyr` package](https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/) made for handling `sqlite` files from R.
We will use `dbplyr` to extract sample information related to our SRA project ID (`SRP`) id of interest
You will recognize a lot of the functions from our [intro to the `tidyverse` notebook](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/intro-to-R-tidyverse/03-intro_to_tidyverse.Rmd). 

### Set Up

For this example, we will use this SRA project id, [SRP045496](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/SRP045496/the-g-protein-alpha-subunit-gsa-is-a-tumor-suppressor-in-sonic-hedgehog-driven-medulloblastoma-rna-seq), which is for an RNA-seq medulloblastoma mouse model experiment.

For more on SRA ids and more than you'll need to know about the SRA database, see this [knowledge base](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56913/).

```{r}
# Declare the project id you are interested in.
study_id <- "SRP045496"
```

Install `SRAdb` if it is not installed.

```{r}
if (!("SRAdb" %in% installed.packages())) {
  BiocManager::install("SRAdb")
}
```

```{r}
# magrittr pipe
`%>%` <- dplyr::`%>%`
```

Set up SRA input directory and file path. 

```{r}
# Declare SRA directory 

> sra_db_dir <- file.path("..", "..", "shared", "data", "SRAdb")

Reviewer: I don't know if we ever described `..`, but more generally, this requires them to have their notebook in the correct place, so I think it would be better to either use `~` or put the SRAdb file somewhere nearer their notebook.

More importantly, most users can not write to "/shared"; that is a privilege only CCDL users have. So we should either download the SRAmetadb.sqlite for them or direct them somewhere else. 

One other note is that I added `~/shared-data/` so they never have to look outside their home directory; RStudio makes this look transparent in the file browser, so they never see that this looks like anything but a normal folder (except that they can't write in it) unless they are looking in the terminal.

Reviewer 2: The file should be there. It’s big (24 GB uncompressed which is what the R package does automatically...) so I don’t think we want multiple copies around.

Author: Hmmm.... Extra copies isn't great, but also the file path thing is an issue... ideas for a lesser of two evils?

Reviewer: We get it and put it somewhere reasonable with steps to show how to get it but a note that they should not. (Those steps can be in an `` ```r ``  block (no braces) so they format properly in the notebook, but don't get a play button.

Then they don't need the `sradb` package installed?

Reviewer 2: This is essentially what I was going to say ☝️ - specifically, we definitely use the `~/shared-data/SRAdb` method.

# Declare database file path
sqlite_file <- file.path(sra_db_dir, "SRAmetadb.sqlite")

if (!dir.exists(sra_db_dir)) {
  dir.create(sra_db_dir, recursive = TRUE)
}
```

Set up output directory and file path. 

```{r}
# Declare output directory 

> output_dir <- file.path("training-modules", "SRA_metadata")

Reviewer: This assumes that the notebook is in their home directory, which we probably do not want to assume (or encourage!).

Author: I've changed things to not use current folders.

# Declare output file path using the project ID
output_metadata_file <- file.path(output_dir, paste0(study_id, "_metadata.tsv"))

# Create the directory if it doesn't exist.
if (!dir.exists(output_dir)) {
  dir.create(output_dir,  recursive = TRUE)
}
```

## Download and connect to SRA metadata sqlite file

Downloading this file will take some time, so we will only download it if it doesn't exist.

```{r}
# Check if the sqlite file exists here
if (!file.exists(sqlite_file)) {
  # Use SRAdb's function to download the file
  SRAdb::getSRAdbFile(destdir = sra_db_dir)
}
```

Connect to the sqlite file. 

```{r}
# Make connection to sqlite database file
sra_con <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite(), sqlite_file)
```

## Find information on our selected SRA project id 

> Use `dbplyr` functions to collect information related to our declared `study_id`.

Reviewer: This may be confusing, as you never use `dbplyr::` and they may think it is a typo.  Probably worth mentioning that this is done automatically by `dplyr`.

In this context, these transformation steps that you'll recognize (`filter`, `inner_join`) are working on the sqlite database directly (using `dbplyr`), which is why the `as.data.frame()` step is required at the end to bring the data into the R environment as a data frame form. 

```{r}
# Use the sqlite connection to connect to this `sra` table

> sra_df <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "sra") %>% 

Reviewer: I would separate out the `dplyr::tbl()` steps. Then you can describe that this command is to tell `dplyr` that it is using tables within the database, rather than data frames. This will also simplify the code in the join (less nesting).

  # Filter to the study_id we are looking for
  dplyr::filter(study_accession == study_id) %>% 
  # Inner join to the study table that has more specific info about the study
  dplyr::inner_join(dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "study") , by = "study_accession") %>% 

>   # We need to do this so the dbplyr queries are transformed to a dataset

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # We need to do this so the dbplyr queries are transformed to a data frame
```

>   as.data.frame() 

Reviewer: I am not sure we need to do this; `dplyr::pull()` might be enough if all we are after is the accessions. But I am not opposed to this either if we want to show all the columns in the table.

Author: I like showing all the information in the tables, in case they want to use this information for something.

```

## Retrieve sample-level information

Create a vector of sample ids that are related to our `study_id`.

```{r}
# Pull out sample accessions for the corresponding study
sample_accessions <- sra_df %>% 
  dplyr::pull(sample_accession)
```

> Use `dbplyr` functions to filter to only the samples related to our `study_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `dplyr` functions to filter to only the samples related to our `study_id`.
```

```{r}
# Connect to a different table in the sqlite file
sample_df <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "sample") %>% 
  # Collect the samples that we identified in the previous set of steps
  dplyr::filter(sample_accession %in% sample_accessions) %>%
  # Turn into a data.frame
  as.data.frame()
```

## Do some cleaning of the sample_df

> Here we'll do some cleaning these cleaning steps will be dependent the metadata itself and on what information you are interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we'll do some cleaning. These cleaning steps will be dependent the metadata itself and on what information you are interested in.
```

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df <- sample_df %>% 

>   dplyr::select(-which(apply(is.na(.), 2, all)))

Reviewer: Do you want to explain what this is doing?

Also, `dplyr::select_if(~!all(is.na(.)))`  I don't know if that is more clear. Either way (and I really don't care which) you should explain what you are cleaning up.

```

## Write the sample_df to TSV file

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df %>% 

>   readr::write_tsv(file.path(output_metadata_file))

Reviewer: It is already a path!
```suggestion
  readr::write_tsv(output_metadata_file)
```

We will use `*db*plyr` (an extension of `*d*plyr` functions) to extract sample information related to our SRA project ID (`SRP`) id of interest. 
You will recognize a lot of the functions from our [intro to the `tidyverse` notebook](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/intro-to-R-tidyverse/03-intro_to_tidyverse.Rmd). 

### Set Up

For this example, we will use this SRA project id, [SRP045496](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/SRP045496/the-g-protein-alpha-subunit-gsa-is-a-tumor-suppressor-in-sonic-hedgehog-driven-medulloblastoma-rna-seq), which is for an RNA-seq medulloblastoma mouse model experiment.

For more on SRA ids and more than you'll need to know about the SRA database, see this [knowledge base](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56913/).

```{r}
# Declare the project id you are interested in.
study_id <- "SRP045496"
```

Install `SRAdb` if it is not installed.

```{r}
if (!("SRAdb" %in% installed.packages())) {
  BiocManager::install("SRAdb")
}
```

```{r}
# magrittr pipe
`%>%` <- dplyr::`%>%`
```

Set up SRA input directory and file path. 

We have already downloaded this SRAdb file for you to the `shared-data` folder.

```{r}

> # Declare SRA directory 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Declare SRA directory (starting with your home directory)
```

#}
```

Set up output directory and file path. 

```{r}
# Declare output directory 
output_dir <- file.path("SRA_metadata")

# Declare output file path using the project ID
output_metadata_file <- file.path(output_dir, paste0(study_id, "_metadata.tsv"))

# Create the directory if it doesn't exist.
if (!dir.exists(output_dir)) {
  dir.create(output_dir,  recursive = TRUE)
}
```

## Download and connect to SRA metadata sqlite file

The file you need is already downloaded for you in `shared-data/SRAdb` but we 
are including this code chunk so you know how to obtain this file outside of our 
RStudio Server. 

```{r}
# We don't need to do this next step this time because we'e already downloaded this 
# file for you in the `shared-data` folder.

# Downloading this file will take some time, so we will only download it if it doesn't exist.
# if (!file.exists(sqlite_file)) {
#  # Use SRAdb's function to download the file
#  SRAdb::getSRAdbFile(destdir = sra_db_dir)
#}
```

Connect to the sqlite file. 

```{r}
# Make connection to sqlite database file
sra_con <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite(), sqlite_file)
```

## Find information on our selected SRA project id 

> Extract the `sra` table from the sqlite connection: `sra_con`, to the sqlite file, `sqlite_file`.

Reviewer: I added a bit more explanation of what a database file *is* here. I don't know if it is worth showing the table list from the database with `dplyr::src_tbls(sra_con)`, but it is something to consider. 
```suggestion
`sqlite` databases are made up of a set of tables, much like the data frames we have been using. 
To use those with dplyr, we need to create variables that point to each table that we want to use. 

Create an object that refers to the `sra` table from the sqlite connection: `sra_con`, to the sqlite file, `sqlite_file`.
```

```{r}
sra_table <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "sra") 
```

> Extract a different table, the `study` table from the same sqlite connection/file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an object that refers to the `study` table from the same sqlite connection/file.
```

```{r}
study_table <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "study")
```

Use the `d*b*plyr` extension of `dplyr` functions to collect information related to our declared `study_id`.

> In this context, these transformation steps that you'll recognize (`filter`, `inner_join`) are working on the sqlite database directly (using `dbplyr`), which is why the `as.data.frame()` step is required at the end to bring the data into the R environment as a data frame form. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this context, these transformation steps that you'll recognize (`filter`, `inner_join`) are working on the sqlite database directly (using `dbplyr`), which is why the `as.data.frame()` step is required at the end to bring the data into the R environment as a standard data frame. 
```

study_id <- "SRP045496"
```

```{r}
# magrittr pipe
`%>%` <- dplyr::`%>%`
```

Set up SRA input directory and file path. 

We have already downloaded this SRAdb file to the `shared-data` folder for you.

```{r}
# Declare SRA directory 
# Here ~ refers to your home directory
sra_db_dir <- file.path("~", "shared-data", "SRAdb")

# Declare database file path
sqlite_file <- file.path(sra_db_dir, "SRAmetadb.sqlite")
```

Set up output directory and file path. 

```{r}
# Declare output directory 
output_dir <- file.path("SRA_metadata")

# Declare output file path using the project ID
output_metadata_file <- file.path(output_dir, paste0(study_id, "_metadata.tsv"))

# Create the directory if it doesn't exist.
if (!dir.exists(output_dir)) {
  dir.create(output_dir,  recursive = TRUE)
}
```

Connect to the sqlite file. 

```{r}
# Make connection to sqlite database file
sra_con <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite(), sqlite_file)
```

## Find information on our selected SRA project id 

`sqlite` databases are made up of a set of tables, much like the data frames we have been using. 
We need to create variables that point to each table that we want to use with `dplyr`.

> Create an object that refers to the `sra` table from the sqlite connection: `sra_con`, to the sqlite file, `sqlite_file`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `dplyr::tbl()`, create an object that refers to the `sra` table from the sqlite connection: `sra_con`, to the sqlite file, `sqlite_file`.
```

```{r}
sra_table <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "sra") 
```

Create an object that refers to the `study` table from the same sqlite connection/file..

```{r}
study_table <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "study")
```

Use the `d*b*plyr` extension of `dplyr` functions to collect information related to our declared `study_id`.

> In this context, these transformation steps that you'll recognize (`filter`, `inner_join`) are working on the sqlite database directly (using `dbplyr`), which is why the `as.data.frame()` step is required at the end to bring the data into the R environment as a standard data frame. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this context, these transformation steps that you'll recognize (`filter()`, `inner_join()`) are working on the sqlite database directly (using `dbplyr`), which is why the `as.data.frame()` step is required at the end to bring the data into the R environment as a standard data frame. 
```

  # We need to do this so the dbplyr queries are transformed to a data frame
  as.data.frame() 
```

## Retrieve sample-level information

Create a vector of sample ids that are related to our `study_id`.

```{r}
# Pull out sample accessions for the corresponding study
sample_accessions <- sra_df %>% 
  dplyr::pull(sample_accession)
```

Connect to `sample` table in our sqlite connection, `sra_con`.

```{r}
sample_table <- dplyr::tbl(sra_con, "sample") 
```

Use `dbplyr` functions to filter the `sample_table` to only the samples related to our `study_id`.

```{r}
# Filter the sample_table of the sqlite file
sample_df <- sample_table %>% 
  # Collect the samples that we identified in the previous set of steps
  dplyr::filter(sample_accession %in% sample_accessions) %>%
  # Turn into a data.frame
  as.data.frame()
```

## Clean the metadata

Here we'll do some cleaning. 
These cleaning steps will be dependent the metadata itself and on what information you are interested in.

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df <- sample_df %>% 
  # Here we getting rid of any columns that only consist of NAs
  dplyr::select(-which(apply(is.na(.), 2, all)))
```

> We're interested in the sample accession and the sample attributes only, so we will use the `dplyr::select` function to pick the columns we want to retain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're interested in the sample accession and the sample attributes only, so we will use the `dplyr::select()` function to pick the columns we want to retain.
```

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df <- cleaned_sample_df %>%
  dplyr::select(sample_accession,
                sample_attribute)
```

### Sample attributes

The metadata we're interested in is in a column called `sample_attribute`, but unfortunately it is in a format that is not usable yet.
Let's take a look at that column.

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df$sample_attribute
```

Notice how this single column contains 5 columns worth of information: `source_name`, `strain`, `tissue`, `age`, and `genotype`.
We'd prefer the 5 columns!

> Luckily there's another package in the Tidyverse that has functionality for splitting up the column, [`tidyr`](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/), and the function is called `separate`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily there's another package in the Tidyverse that has functionality for splitting up the column, [`tidyr`](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/), and the function is called `separate()`.
```

```{r}
# We use the attribute names from above. This character vector will be specific
# to the experiment you are working with.
new_columns <- c("source_name", 
                 "strain", 
                 "tissue", 
                 "age", 
                 "genotype")
```

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df <- cleaned_sample_df %>%
  # We first tell separate which column we'd like to separate into multiple
  # column
  tidyr::separate(col = sample_attribute,
                  # Here we need to tell the function what columns to split 
                  # things *into* - we'll use the vector we created above
                  into = new_columns,
                  # What characters can be used to mark the separation between
                  # items that should become multiple columns
                  # We need to use \\ in front of each | because | is a 
                  # special character
                  sep = " \\|\\| ")
```

Let's take a look at our **new** columns.

```{r}
cleaned_sample_df %>%
  dplyr::select(new_columns)
```

This is certainly _better_, but it's not quite what we want yet.
We'll want to remove the words before the `:` in each column.

> We can use `dplyr::mutate` and yet another Tidyverse package, [`stringr`](https://stringr.tidyverse.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use `dplyr::mutate()` and yet another Tidyverse package, [`stringr`](https://stringr.tidyverse.org/).
```

> Let's first look at how we can use `stringr::str_replace` to get only the relevant information we want. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first look at how we can use `stringr::str_extract()` to get only the relevant information we want. 
```

Here the relevant information is everything after the pattern `: `.
We'll use `source_name` as an example.
What `.*` does below is say that the pattern we want to _extract_ from `source_name` is everything before `: `.

```{r}
stringr::str_extract(cleaned_sample_df$source_name, ".*: ")
```

Using `.*:` returns everything we want to remove from this column.

> We can use this same approach with `stringr::str_remove` to remove everything before and including `: `:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use this same approach with `stringr::str_remove()` to remove everything before and including `: `:
```

```{r}
stringr::str_remove(cleaned_sample_df$source_name, ".*: ")
```

This is exactly what we want to keep in the `source_name` column! 

> Now we're ready to use `stringr::str_remove` with `dplyr::mutate` to get some cleaned metadata!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we're ready to use `stringr::str_remove()` with `dplyr::mutate()` to get some cleaned metadata!
```

> We'll actually use `dplyr::mutate_at`, which will apply the function *at* each column we specify.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll actually use `dplyr::mutate_at()`, which will apply the function *at* each column we specify.
```
